**JavaScript Object Notation** or **JSON**
is a way to represent JavaScript objects
as strings.
This enables us to send our data
across to different devices on the internet
which could be using different programming languages.

JavaScript has in-built functions
to convert an object to JSON - `JSON.stringify()`.
When we pass an object to `JSON.stringify()`,
it returns the JSON representation
of that object.
We'll learn more about this method
in the next chapter.

Let's start out simple
and
convert an empty object to JSON.

<codeblock language="javascript" type="lesson">
<code>
const emptyObject = {};
const jsonString = JSON.stringify(emptyObject);
console.log(jsonString);
</code>
</codeblock>

In the above example,
`JSON.stringify` returns a string
that only contains `{}`.
This represent an empty object.

Now let's convert an object
with one property into JSON.

<codeblock language="javascript" type="lesson">
<code>
const user = { name: "Sam" };
const jsonString = JSON.stringify(user);
console.log(jsonString);
</code>
</codeblock>

In the above example,
we get a string that is very similar
to the object definition
`{ name: "Sam" }`.
The only difference is that
the key is wrapped in double quotes
in the JSON string.
All keys in a JSON string
will be wrapped in double-quotes.

Now, let's add another property.
This time with a number value.

<codeblock language="javascript" type="lesson">
<code>
const user = {
  name: "Sam",
  age: 20,
};
const jsonString = JSON.stringify(user);
console.log(jsonString);
</code>
</codeblock>

In the above example,
the output is a comma-separated
list of key-value pairs.
Only string values in a JSON string
are wrapped in double-quotes.
Since the value of `user.age`
is a number,
it is not wrapped in double-quotes
in the JSON string.

Here are some more examples
of JSON representations
of various data types in JavaScript.

<codeblock language="javascript" type="lesson">
<code>
console.log(JSON.stringify([1, 2, 4, 5]));

console.log(JSON.stringify({
  name: "Sam",
  age: 20,
  marks: [89, 90, 72, 60],
  isGraduate: true,
}));

console.log(JSON.stringify(new Date()));
</code>
</codeblock>

Do note that,
`null`, `Infinity` and `NaN`
will be represented as `"null"`
in JSON strings.
`undefined` and functions
will just return `undefined`
when passed to `JSON.stringify`.

<codeblock language="javascript" type="lesson">
<code>
console.log(JSON.stringify(null));
console.log(JSON.stringify(Infinity));
console.log(JSON.stringify(NaN));

console.log(JSON.stringify(undefined));
console.log(JSON.stringify(() => {}));
</code>
</codeblock>

We can see the difference between
`null` and `undefined` in JSON strings.
While `JSON.stringify(null)` returns
a string `"null"`,
`JSON.stringify(undefined)`
simply returns `undefined`.
Any undefined value is also
omitted from JSON strings.

<codeblock language="javascript" type="lesson">
<code>
console.log(JSON.stringify(null));

console.log(JSON.stringify(undefined));

const nullAndUndefined = {
  nullProp: null,
  undefinedProp: undefined,
}
console.log(JSON.stringify(nullAndUndefined));
</code>
</codeblock>

In the above example,
the property of `nullAndUndefined`
with the value `null`
shows up in the JSON string.
But the property of `nullAndUndefined`
with the value `undefined`
does not show up in the JSON string.
