## All you need is a working internet connection

Welcome to BigBinary Academy!

In order to learn Ruby on Rails, all you need is a working internet connection.

## Navigating through the book

We have designed the book in a way that it is user-friendly and navigating
through the book is extremely easy. Let's talk about the `Table of contents`
first. It contains a list of all the chapters each accompanied by its
respective lessons.

Examining the image below reveals that every element within the list showcases
the chapter title and an inventory of lessons within. Selecting a title
navigates to the corresponding chapter, while selecting a lesson directly
accesses that particular lesson within the chapter.

<image alt="Table of contents">table-of-contents.png</image>

You can also press `/` to search for keywords inside the
table of contents.

## Searching within the book

You can search for keywords within the book. If you navigate to the top-right
corner of the book you will notice a search bar present. Clicking on it will
open a search dialog box.

Type in the keywords you wish to search and you will get a list of items
matching search parameters. You can click on any of the search items and you
will be directed to the relevant section within the book.

You can also use `/` shortcut keys to open the search
dialog box. To navigate through the search results, you can either use the mouse
pointer or `up` and `down` arrow keys. When you press the `enter` key on one of
the results, you will be taken to the exact paragraph within the book which
contains that keyword.

To close the search dialog box, you can either click on the `close` icon on
top-right corner of the dialog box or press the `ESC` key.

<image alt="Search dialog box">search-box.png</image>

## What is an example?

There are two types of code-snippets in this book. One which the reader is
supposed to copy and paste to their project and the other category is examples.

Examples are merely there to explain a concept and an example code is not a part
of the application code. There might be instances where the examples are taken
from the `Granite` application itself.

Do not copy and paste an example code-snippet to your project as it might lead
to unexpected errors and bugs in the application.

It is explicitly mentioned inside the book for each code-snippet if it is
supposed to be copied to your project or if it is an example.

The following is an example of the type of code that we DON'T want you to
copy-paste into the application codebase:

<image alt="Example code snippet">example-code-snippet.png</image>

But if we have explicitly mentioned to add to the codebase, then you should add
it. The following is an example for the type of code we want you to copy-paste
into the application:

<image alt="Copy paste code snippet">copy-paste-code-snippet.png</image>

## How to copy and paste code?

There are two ways to copy a code-snippet from this book and paste it inside
your application.

One way is to manually drag and select the code to be copied and then paste it
into the respective file within the project.

Or you can hover on the top-right corner of the code enclosing block and a copy
icon will appear. Clicking on that icon will copy the code, which you can then
paste into the desired file within the project.

## When to copy-paste code?

As mentioned previously in this chapter, do not copy and paste a code snippet
unless it is explicitly mentioned to do so in the surrounding sentences. Doing
otherwise can lead to errors and bugs in your application.

## Need Help?

If you encounter any difficulties while progressing through this course, feel free to seek assistance. You can use the `Help` widget located at the bottom right corner of the page or send us an email at hello@bigbinary.com with your queries.

## Help us to improve the book

In this book, our attempt is to keep things simple. If any part of the book is
confusing or something is missing then please send us an email at hello@bigbinary.com.

We at BigBinary wrote this book because we wanted to have a book that contains
documentation about using both Rails and React in a simple step-by-step fashion,
that is easy to follow.

And that's what we have built in this book.

Your comments and suggestions are valuable to us. We are constantly working on
improving the book. Please do let us know your thoughts.

From BigBinary's side, we can promise that this book will forever be free and
publicly accessible.
