The `map()` method is a fantastic
tool that helps us change the values
in an array without changing
the original array.
It allows us to create a new array
with modified elements easily.

Let us look at an example where
we have a list of numbers: `[2, 4, 6]`
Our goal is to generate a new list
by adding **1** to each element of
the given list.
<codeblock language="javascript" type="lesson">
<code>
const evenNumbers = [2, 4, 6];
const createOddNumberArray = (number) => {
  return number + 1;
};
const oddNumbers = evenNumbers.map(number => createOddNumberArray(number));

console.log(oddNumbers);
</code>
</codeblock>

In the code above, we defined
a function called `createOddNumber()`.
This function takes a number and
returns that number incremented by 1.
Then, we use the `map()` method to
call this function on each element
of the `evenNumbers` array and
create a new array `oddNumbers`
with the results.

Let us make our code even cleaner
by moving the function definition
within the `map()` method by passing
an anonymous function as the
callback to the `map()` method.

<codeblock language="javascript" type="lesson">
<code>
const evenNumbers = [2, 4, 6];
const oddNumbers = evenNumbers.map((number) => number + 1);
console.log(oddNumbers);
</code>
</codeblock>

In the improved version, we also
used the shorthand method for arrow
function without needing to specify
the return keyword.

It's like using a shortcut to create
the new `oddNumbers` array
and
the result is the same as before.

## Note:
The `map()` method returns an array,
while `forEach()` does not.
Knowing this distinction is helpful
when you choose the right method for your task.
